Add ZooKeeper to KRaft migration blog post (#420)
strimzi/strimzi.github.io: _posts/2024-03-22-kraft-migration.md

---
layout: post
title:  "From ZooKeeper to KRaft: let's automate the migration with Strimzi"
date: 2024-03-22
author: paolo_patierno
---

> The Apache Kafka project has been using [Apache ZooKeeper](https://zookeeper.apache.org/) since its inception to store metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Apache Kafka project has been using [Apache ZooKeeper](https://zookeeper.apache.org/) since its inception to store metadata, handle leader election, and broker discovery.
```

Author: Isn't this suggestion similar to the sentence coming on the next line?

> Registered brokers, the current controller and topics' configuration are just a few of the data that ZooKeeper stores for supporting a running Kafka cluster.

Reviewer: Yeah, maybe we can merge the two. I think it's important to highlight that ZK is not only a metadata store, but much more.

Registered brokers, the current controller and topics' configuration are just a few of the data that ZooKeeper stores for supporting a running Kafka cluster.

> Using a dedicated and centralized system for maintaining configuration data sounded the right approach at that time and ZooKeeper has been doing its work for long.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using a dedicated and centralized system for maintaining cluster metadata and offload leader election was the right approach at that time, because ZooKeeper was battle tested.
```

But taking care of an additional component alongside your Kafka cluster is not that simple.

> Also, ZooKeeper has started to be a limitation for better scaling in terms of topics' partitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, ZooKeeper has become a bottleneck that limits the amount of topics' partitions that a single broker can handle.
```

> For these and more other reasons, the Apache Kafka community opened the "famous" [KIP-500](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-500%3A+Replace+ZooKeeper+with+a+Self-Managed+Metadata+Quorum) in late 2019 and started to work on the ZooKeeper removal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For these and other reasons, the Kafka community opened the "famous" [KIP-500](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-500%3A+Replace+ZooKeeper+with+a+Self-Managed+Metadata+Quorum) in late 2019 and started to work on the ZooKeeper removal.
```

<!--more-->

### What is "wrong" with ZooKeeper?

As already mentioned, Kafka has been using ZooKeeper as its metadata management system for several functions:

* **Cluster membership**: each broker, joining the Kafka cluster, registers itself with a temporary znode on ZooKeeper;
* **Controller election**: when a broker starts, it tries to take the "controller" role by creating the ephemeral `/controller` znode on ZooKeeper. If it already exists, it states what is the broker in the cluster having such a role and what is its epoch;
* **Topics configuration**: all the topics' configuration parameters are stored in ZooKeeper together with information like the number of partitions and on which brokers the replicas are hosted;

> * **Access Control Lists (ACLs)**: when a client connects to the cluster, it could be authenticated and authorized to read or write on several topics based on the ACLs stored in ZooKeeper;

Author: I was providing a little bit of context around authN and authZ. Maybe I can use your sentence instead of `based on the ACLs stored in ZooKeeper;` but not replacing the entire sentence?

> * **Access Control Lists (ACLs)**: when a client connects to the cluster, it could be authenticated and authorized to read or write on several topics based on the ACLs stored in ZooKeeper;

Author: I tweaked it a little bit.

> * **Quotas**: brokers can limit resources used by clients in terms of network bandwidth and CPU utilization via quotas stored in ZooKeeper;

Author: Ditto as above. I was providing more context about quotas for people who don't know (maybe). We could apply same as before so using your suggestion to just replace `quotas stored in ZooKeeper;` but not the entire line?

> * **Quotas**: brokers can limit resources used by clients in terms of network bandwidth and CPU utilization via quotas stored in ZooKeeper;

Author: I tweaked it a little bit.

> By using the `zookeeper-shell` tool, it is possible to connect to a ZooKeeper ensemble and show some of them.

Author: The "some" of them was referring to the a few examples I am providing starting from the next line but maybe it's not clear. I will remove `and show some of them.`.

ls /brokers/ids
[0, 1, 2]

get /brokers/ids/0
{"features":{},"listener_security_protocol_map":{"CONTROLPLANE-9090":"SSL","REPLICATION-9091":"SSL","PLAIN-9092":"PLAINTEXT","TLS-9093":"SSL"},"endpoints":["CONTROLPLANE-9090://my-cluster-kafka-0.my-cluster-kafka-brokers.myproject.svc:9090","REPLICATION-9091://my-cluster-kafka-0.my-cluster-kafka-brokers.myproject.svc:9091","PLAIN-9092://my-cluster-kafka-0.my-cluster-kafka-brokers.myproject.svc:9092","TLS-9093://my-cluster-kafka-0.my-cluster-kafka-brokers.myproject.svc:9093"],"jmx_port":-1,"port":9092,"host":"my-cluster-kafka-0.my-cluster-kafka-brokers.myproject.svc","version":5,"timestamp":"1710691902130"}
```

As mentioned, the controller election happens when the first broker creates the ephemeral `/controller` node storing the broker ID.

```shell
get /controller
{"version":2,"brokerid":0,"timestamp":"1710691902625","kraftControllerEpoch":-1}
```

Finally, the `/config/topics` znode lists all the topics in the cluster with the corresponding configuration.

```shell
get /config/topics/my-topic
{"version":1,"config":{"retention.ms":"100000"}} // all the other configuration parameters are omitted because using default values
```

> ZooKeeper is designed to be replicated across a number of nodes which built an ensemble.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ZooKeeper data are replicated across a number of nodes which form an ensemble.
```

> A leader node is the one where all the write requests got by clients are forwarded from the other nodes and the operations are coordinated by using the ZooKeeper Atomic Broadcast (ZAB) protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A leader node is the one where all the write requests coming from clients are forwarded to by the other nodes, and the operations are coordinated by using the ZooKeeper Atomic Broadcast (ZAB) protocol.
```

This protocol keeps all nodes in sync and ensures reliability on messages delivery.

> But having ZooKeeper means dealing with a totally different system which needs to be deployed, managed and troubleshooted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But having ZooKeeper means dealing with a totally different distributed system which needs to be deployed, managed and troubleshooted.
```

The admin doesn't have to take care of the Kafka cluster only but also the ZooKeeper ensemble running alongside it.

> Because ZooKeeper requires a quorum, not having the majority of nodes to process requests can also affect the Kafka cluster's availability.

Author: Good point. I will remove it.

ZooKeeper also represents a bottleneck for scalability and puts a limit on the number of topics and the corresponding partitions supported within a Kafka cluster.
It has a performance impact when, for example, there is a controller failover and the new elected one has to fetch metadata from ZooKeeper, including all the topics information.
Also, any metadata update needs to be propagated to the other brokers.
The problem is that the metadata changes propagations, by using RPCs, grow with the number of topics' partitions involved and more partitions means more metadata to propagate, so it takes longer and the system gets slower.

### Welcome to KRaft!

In order to overcome the limitations related to the ZooKeeper usage, the Kafka community came with the idea of using Kafka itself to store metadata and using the event-driven pattern to take them updated across the nodes.

> The work started with [KIP-500](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-500%3A+Replace+ZooKeeper+with+a+Self-Managed+Metadata+Quorum) in late 2019 by introducing a self-managed metadata quorum based on a specific Kafka implementation of the [Raft](https://raft.github.io/) consensus protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The work started with [KIP-500](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-500%3A+Replace+ZooKeeper+with+a+Self-Managed+Metadata+Quorum) in late 2019 with the introduction of a built-in consensus protocol based on [Raft](https://raft.github.io/).
```

That was named Kafka Raft ... KRaft for friends!

> KRaft is an event-based implementation of the Raft protocol with a quorum controller maintaining an event log, a single-partition topic named `__cluster_metadata`, to store the metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
KRaft is an event-based implementation of the Raft protocol with a quorum controller maintaining an event log, a single-partition topic named `__cluster_metadata`, to store the metadata.
Unlike the other topics, this is special one, because records are written to disk synchronously, which is required by the Raft algorithm for correctness.
```

| offset: 3007 CreateTime: 1710774451597 keySize: -1 valueSize: 113 sequence: -1 headerKeys: [] payload: {"type":"PARTITION_RECORD","version":1,"data":{"partitionId":1,"topicId":"xOxBrcYuSRWgtFuZIBiXIA","replicas":[3,4,5],"isr":[3,4,5],"removingReplicas":[],"addingReplicas":[],"leader":3,"leaderEpoch":0,"partitionEpoch":0,"directories":["uHY7hO6-42Q7O4k0zLMmtg","p2UpbSD99eygD2ZToiSMzg","SaZDxfHKu3NMZ7OnFP7YnA"]}}
| offset: 3008 CreateTime: 1710774451597 keySize: -1 valueSize: 113 sequence: -1 headerKeys: [] payload: {"type":"PARTITION_RECORD","version":1,"data":{"partitionId":2,"topicId":"xOxBrcYuSRWgtFuZIBiXIA","replicas":[4,5,3],"isr":[4,5,3],"removingReplicas":[],"addingReplicas":[],"leader":4,"leaderEpoch":0,"partitionEpoch":0,"directories":["p2UpbSD99eygD2ZToiSMzg","SaZDxfHKu3NMZ7OnFP7YnA","uHY7hO6-42Q7O4k0zLMmtg"]}}
```

All the possible metadata changes are encoded as specific event records in Apache Kafka.
They are all described using JSON files (which are then used to automatically build the corresponding Java classes) you can find [here](https://github.com/apache/kafka/tree/trunk/metadata/src/main/resources/common/metadata).

> Getting rid of an external system like ZooKeeper simplifies the overall architecture and removes the burden of taking care of an additional component.

Reviewer 2: I stopped reading here. I'll carry on tomorrow.

By using the new `process.roles` configuration parameter, a Kafka node can act as a `broker`, a `controller` or being in mixed-mode.
As a `broker`, it is responsible to communicate with the Kafka clients and to store and serve data by handing read and write requests on topics.
As a `controller`, it takes part at the quorum controller being a leader or follower, storing the cluster state and handling the metadata changes.
Effectively, `broker` and `controller` are two different services running on the node within the JVM.
When in mixed-mode, it gets both roles by taking care of Kafka clients communication on one hand and metadata changes on the other.
Using the mixed-mode allows to reduce the number of nodes within the cluster compared to a ZooKeeper configuration, even if it is not recommended to be used in a production environment but only for testing or development purposes.

### How to migrate from ZooKeeper to KRaft

As today, it is expected to have users who are running ZooKeeper-based clusters but they are interested in migrating to KRaft mode as soon as possible in order to overcome all the limitations we have talked about.

> Furthermore, ZooKeeper is already considered as deprecated by the Apache Kafka community and its support will be removed with the 4.0 release later this year or early the next one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, ZooKeeper is already considered as deprecated by the Apache Kafka community and its support will be removed with the 4.0 release later this year or early next year.
```

The metadata are still copied to ZooKeeper and the cluster is working in a so called "dual-write" mode.

![KRaft dual-write](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-22-kraft-migration-04-kraft-dual-write.png)

#### Moving brokers to be full KRaft

The next step is about moving the brokers to be in full KRaft mode and not using ZooKeeper anymore.
In order to do so, the brokers configuration is updated by removing the connection to ZooKeeper and disabling the migration flag.
All the brokers are rolled again and, on restart, they are now in full KRaft mode without any connection or usage of ZooKeeper.
The KRaft controllers are still in "dual-write" mode and any metadata changes are copied to ZooKeeper.

![Brokers only full KRaft](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-22-kraft-migration-05-brokers-kraft.png)

#### Migration finalization

The final step is about reconfiguring the KRaft controllers without the connection to ZooKeeper and disabling the migration flag.
When all the KRaft controllers are rolled, the cluster is working in full KRaft mode and the ZooKeeper ensemble is not used anymore.

> From now on, it is possible to deprovision the ZooKeeper nodes if not used for any other purposes within your environment.

Reviewer: I would remove "if not used for any other purposes within your environment", as sharing ZK for different workloads is usually a bad practice, at least in production.

    strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled
# ...
```

The annotation change triggers the Strimzi operator to run the following steps for you:

* deploy the KRaft controllers, which are configured to be connected to ZooKeeper and with the migration flag enabled;
* configure the running brokers with the connection to the KRaft controller quorum, the migration flag enabled and roll them;
* checking the status of the migration, on each reconciliation, and updating the `Kafka` custom resource to provide such status to the user through the `status.kafkaMetadataState` field;
* when the migration is done, the brokers are reconfigured to be not connected to ZooKeeper, with the migration flag disabled and they are rolled again.

As you can see, just applying one single annotation value has covered most of the phases in the migration procedure with the user doing actually nothing but following what the operator is running for them.

While the migration is going on, you can see the cluster changing the metadata state during the migration process from `ZooKeeper` to `KRaftPostMigration`, and then waiting for the user to finalize it.

> ```shell

Reviewer: Should we also add the command here?

Author: I am not sure. I also haven't added all the annotate command needed to change the annotation which are described in the documentation in details.

my-cluster   3                        3                     True    KRaftDualWriting   
my-cluster   3                        3                     True    KRaftPostMigration   
my-cluster   3                        3                     True    KRaftPostMigration   True
```

In this status, the cluster is still working in "dual-write" mode and the user can validate that everything is working fine before deciding to finalize the migration or rolling back to use ZooKeeper.

#### Migration finalization

At this point, the user can finalize the migration by changing the `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation to `enabled`.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/kraft: enabled # updated from "migration" to "enabled" to finalize the migration process
    strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled
# ...
```

The operator will configure the KRaft controllers without the ZooKeeper connection, with the migration flag disabled and roll them.
When the cluster is full KRaft, the operator will delete all the resources related to ZooKeeper as well.

During the finalization, the cluster metadata state moves to the final `KRaft`.

> NAME         DESIRED KAFKA REPLICAS   DESIRED ZK REPLICAS   READY   METADATA STATE   WARNINGS
> ...
> my-cluster   3                        3                     True    KRaftPostMigration   True
> my-cluster   3                        3                     True    PreKRaft             True
> my-cluster   3                        3                     True    KRaft                True
> my-cluster                                                  True    KRaft                True
> my-cluster                                                  True    KRaft                

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
NAME         DESIRED KAFKA REPLICAS   DESIRED ZK REPLICAS   READY   METADATA STATE   WARNINGS
...
my-cluster   3                        3                     True    KRaftPostMigration   True
my-cluster   3                        3                     True    PreKRaft             True
my-cluster   3                        3                     True    KRaft                True
my-cluster                                                  True    KRaft                True
my-cluster                                                  True    KRaft                
```
```

Author: I don't get what's the suggestion here.

Reviewer: the ```shell wrapping

Author: why removing it? It's wrapping all the other console outputs I have across the blog post.

Reviewer: I was actually suggesting to add them, because they were missing :)

Author: LOL!!! Thanks Fede!

...
my-cluster   3                        3                             KRaftDualWriting     
my-cluster   3                        3                             KRaftDualWriting     
my-cluster   3                        3                     True    ZooKeeper            True
```

### Conclusion

The Apache Kafka community has deprecated the usage of ZooKeeper to store the cluster metadata and it will be totally removed in the 4.0 version coming later this year or early the next one.
It means that users should move soon to create new KRaft-based clusters only.
Of course, there are a lot of ZooKeeper-based clusters already running in production out there which need to be migrated.
While the manual process could be considered long and complex if your cluster is running on bare-metal or virtual machines, it is very easy if the cluster is running on Kubernetes instead.
The Strimzi operator provides you a semi-automated process which needs just a few manual steps to update an annotation to migrate your cluster.
If it is about testing on a development environment or a production one, let us know your experience about migrating your cluster with Strimzi.

> Your feedback are very welcome!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your feedback is very welcome!
```

```

As mentioned, the controller election happens when the first broker creates the ephemeral `/controller` node storing the broker ID.

```shell
get /controller
{"version":2,"brokerid":0,"timestamp":"1710691902625","kraftControllerEpoch":-1}
```

Finally, the `/config/topics` znode lists all the topics in the cluster with the corresponding configuration.

```shell
get /config/topics/my-topic
{"version":1,"config":{"retention.ms":"100000"}} // all the other configuration parameters are omitted because using default values
```

ZooKeeper data are replicated across a number of nodes which form an ensemble.
A leader node is the one where all the write requests, coming from clients, are forwarded to by the other nodes, and the operations are coordinated by using the ZooKeeper Atomic Broadcast (ZAB) protocol.

> This protocol keeps all nodes in sync and ensures reliability on messages delivery.

Author: We can but it doesn't explain what the first sentence is trying to say. If a client sends a request to a ZooKeeper follower, its request is anyway forwarded to the leader to be executed. Do you think that it's useless?

> This protocol keeps all nodes in sync and ensures reliability on messages delivery.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this level of detail is particularly useful. Kafka brokers can also forwards requests and it's not something you mention.

> This protocol keeps all nodes in sync and ensures reliability on messages delivery.

Author: Ok makes sense.

There is a manual procedure, made by several phases, to run in order to execute such a migration.
The following content doesn't want to be an exhaustive description of the migration procedure but more an overview of how it is supposed to work.
For more details, please refer to the official [ZooKeeper to KRaft Migration](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_zk_migration) documentation.

#### Deploying the KRaft controller quorum

At the beginning, we have the Kafka brokers running in ZooKeeper-mode and connected to the ZooKeeper ensemble used to store metadata.

![ZooKeeper-based cluster](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-22-kraft-migration-01-zk-brokers.png)

> NOTE: the green square boxed number highlights the "generation" of the nodes which are rolled more times during the process.

The first step is about deploying the KRaft controller quorum which will be in charge of storing the metadata in KRaft mode.
In general, the number of nodes will be the same as the number of the ZooKeeper nodes actually running.

> It is also important to highlight that the migration doesn't support the usage of mixed-nodes.

Author: Not sure. Anyway we have a big problem. It seems that making text in bold on our blog posts don't work. I tried last time on the blog post about StrimziCon with no success. The usual ways like using markdown format or HTML bold tag didn't work.

```shell
NAME                                          READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
my-cluster-entity-operator-555785d699-kksrs   2/2     Running   0          17m
my-cluster-kafka-0                            1/1     Running   0          18m
my-cluster-kafka-1                            1/1     Running   0          18m
my-cluster-kafka-2                            1/1     Running   0          18m
my-cluster-zookeeper-0                        1/1     Running   0          20m
my-cluster-zookeeper-1                        1/1     Running   0          20m
my-cluster-zookeeper-2                        1/1     Running   0          20m
strimzi-cluster-operator-7ddf57685d-245pd     1/1     Running   0          17m
```

#### From ZooKeeper to full KRaft based brokers

The first step is about deploying a `KafkaNodePool` custom resource which hosts the KRaft controllers and then changing the `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation from `disabled` to `migration`.

Following a snippet of a `KafkaNodePool` custom resource to be deployed for getting the KRaft controllers running.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:

>   name: kafka

Author: Good catch! Copy/paste mistake! Thanks!

---
layout: post

> title:  "From ZooKeeper to KRaft: let's automate the migration with Strimzi"

Reviewer 3: I wonder if the tile might be misread as that Strimzi can migrate non-Dtrimzi-managed clusters.

Author: Something like "Migrate your Strimzi-operated cluster from ZooKeeper to KRaft"?

> date: 2024-03-22

Reviewer 3: It would be nice to have earlier date so that we can see the preview.

Removing an external system like ZooKeeper simplifies the overall architecture and removes the burden of taking care of an additional component.
The scalability is also improved by reducing the load on the metadata store by using snapshots to avoid unbounded growth (compacted topic).
When there is a leadership change in the quorum controller, the new leader already has all the committed metadata records so the recovery is pretty fast.

Another interesting aspect of using the KRaft mode is about the role that a single node can have within the cluster itself.
By using the new `process.roles` configuration parameter, a Kafka node can act as a `broker`, a `controller` or being in mixed-mode.
As a `broker`, it is responsible to communicate with the Kafka clients and to store and serve data by handing read and write requests on topics.
As a `controller`, it takes part at the quorum controller being a leader or follower, storing the cluster state and handling the metadata changes.

> Effectively, `broker` and `controller` are two different services running on the node within the JVM.

Author: `This sentence here does not really make sense.` why? aren't they two different services on the broker? and one or the other or both are started depending on the role?

When in mixed-mode, it gets both roles by taking care of Kafka clients communication on one hand and metadata changes on the other.
Using the mixed-mode allows to reduce the number of nodes within the cluster compared to a ZooKeeper configuration, even if it is not recommended to be used in a production environment but only for testing or development purposes.

### How to migrate from ZooKeeper to KRaft

As today, it is expected to have users who are running ZooKeeper-based clusters but they are interested in migrating to KRaft mode as soon as possible in order to overcome all the limitations we have talked about.

> Furthermore, ZooKeeper is already considered as deprecated by the Apache Kafka community and its support will be removed with the 4.0 release later this year or early the next year.

Author: I mixed a little bit getting some useful content from your suggestion.

There is a manual procedure, made by several phases, to run in order to execute such a migration.
The following content doesn't want to be an exhaustive description of the migration procedure but more an overview of how it is supposed to work.
For more details, please refer to the official [ZooKeeper to KRaft Migration](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_zk_migration) documentation.

#### Deploying the KRaft controller quorum

At the beginning, we have the Kafka brokers running in ZooKeeper-mode and connected to the ZooKeeper ensemble used to store metadata.

![ZooKeeper-based cluster](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-22-kraft-migration-01-zk-brokers.png)

> > NOTE: the green square boxed number highlights the "generation" of the nodes which are rolled more times during the process.

Reviewer 2: `olled more times` did you mean `rolled several times` ?

The first step is about deploying the KRaft controller quorum which will be in charge of storing the metadata in KRaft mode.

> In general, the number of nodes will be the same as the number of the ZooKeeper nodes actually running.

Reviewer 2: `the number of nodes` -> `the number of KRaft controller nodes`
`actually` Did you mean `currently`?

> It is also important to highlight that the migration doesn't support the usage of mixed-nodes.

Reviewer 2: It is also important to highlight that the migration process doesn't support migrating to nodes running in combined mode

The nodes forming the KRaft controller quorum are all configured with the connection to ZooKeeper together with the additional `zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true` flag which states the intention to run the migration.
When the KRaft controllers start, they form a quorum, elect the leader and move in a state where they are waiting for the brokers to register.

![KRaft controller quorum deployed](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-22-kraft-migration-02-kraft-deployed.png)

#### Enabling brokers to run the migration

> The next step is about moving the brokers to migration mode.

Reviewer 2: `is about moving` -> `is to move`

Reviewer 2: I wonder if `into migration mode` is more "correct"? Maybe ask confirmation from a native speaker

Author: @PaulRMellor ?

> In order to do so, the brokers configuration needs to be updated by adding the connection to the KRaft controller quorum and enabling the migration with the `zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true` flag.

Reviewer 2: `the brokers configuration` -> `the brokers 'configuration`
`adding the connection to the KRaft controller quorum` -> adding connection details for all nodes of the KRaft controller quorum`

After the update, the brokers need to be rolled one by one to make such configuration changes effective.
On restart, the brokers register to the KRaft controller quorum and the migration begins.
The KRaft controller leader copies all metadata from ZooKeeper to the `__cluster_metadata` topic.

![KRaft migration running](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-22-kraft-migration-03-kraft-migration.png)

> While the migration is running, you can verify its status by looking at the log on the KRaft controller leader or by checking the `ZkMigrationState` metric.

Reviewer 2: Maybe provide the full name for the metric?

> When the migration is completed, the brokers are anyway still running in ZooKeeper mode.

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention the expected state of the metric when the migration is complete?

The KRaft controllers are in charge of handling any requests related to metadata changes within the cluster but they keep sending RPCs to the brokers for metadata updates.
The metadata are still copied to ZooKeeper and the cluster is working in a so called "dual-write" mode.

![KRaft dual-write](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-22-kraft-migration-04-kraft-dual-write.png)

#### Moving brokers to be full KRaft

The next step is about moving the brokers to be in full KRaft mode and not using ZooKeeper anymore.
In order to do so, the brokers configuration is updated by removing the connection to ZooKeeper and disabling the migration flag.
All the brokers are rolled again and, on restart, they are now in full KRaft mode without any connection or usage of ZooKeeper.
The KRaft controllers are still in "dual-write" mode and any metadata changes are copied to ZooKeeper.

![Brokers only full KRaft](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-22-kraft-migration-05-brokers-kraft.png)

#### Migration finalization

> The final step is about reconfiguring the KRaft controllers without the connection to ZooKeeper and disabling the migration flag.

Reviewer 2: `is about reconfiguring` -> `is to reconfigure`

Reviewer 2: I stopped here
